---
layout: post
title: GSoC 2019 - Week 2
comments: true
tags: [ gsoc, Sympy]
---

This was the second week meeting with the GSoC mentors which was scheduled on
Saturday 8th June, 2019 between 12:00 - 01:00 PM (IST). Me, Amit, Yathartha and Harsh
were the attendees of the meeting. It was a surprise having Harsh on this meeting.
In this meeting we mainly discussed about how to integrate lambert another way because
the existing method in PR [#16890](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/16890) is
not trustworthy and upto the mark. So this week I will try to implement the method
or approach told by Yathartha. Important lesson learned in this meeting was that
the method that I implement should have these following qualities to be a better
software developer:-

- Proof Of Correctness

This is very important because I should have a plan before I get to code. Many
things already get straightened up while planning for what to implement and it
ultimately reduces coding time and let us get a more accurate and concrete code.

- Clean and Understandable Code

This factor is also very important to write a code that is easily understandable.
It is better for us as well as it also persuade new contributors easily who are
willing to contribute.

- Extensible Code

A well written code is always extensible. Proper techniques should be learned to
write an extensible code rather than a code that looks like patch.

In this week I also started a PR [#16976](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/16976)
to handle modular equations.\\
It was a worth it meeting because I got to learn various important and necessary
qualities from all of the mentors. Harsh was also glad that we were trying to focus
on well written clean code.

A lot more to learn and implement :) !!
